The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ , the Son of God ;
And it came to pass in those days , that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee , and was baptized of John in Jordan .
And straightway coming up out of the water , he saw the heavens opened , and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him :
And there came a voice from heaven , saying , Thou art my beloved Son , in whom I am well pleased .
Now as he walked by the sea of Galilee , he saw Simon and Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea : for they were fishers .
And Jesus said unto them , Come ye after me , and I will make you to become fishers of men .
And straightway they forsook their nets , and followed him .
And when he had gone a little further thence , he saw James the son of Zebedee , and John his brother , who also were in the ship mending their nets .
And they went into Capernaum ; and straightway on the sabbath day he entered into the synagogue , and taught .
And they were astonished at his doctrine : for he taught them as one that had authority , and not as the scribes .
And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit ; and he cried out ,
And Jesus rebuked him , saying , Hold thy peace , and come out of him .
And when the unclean spirit had torn him , and cried with a loud voice , he came out of him .
And they were all amazed , insomuch that they questioned among themselves , saying , What thing is this ? what new doctrine is this ? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits , and they do obey him .
And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round about Galilee .
And forthwith , when they were come out of the synagogue , they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew , with James and John .
But Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever , and anon they tell him of her .
And he came and took her by the hand , and lifted her up ; and immediately the fever left her , and she ministered unto them .
And in the morning , rising up a great while before day , he went out , and departed into a solitary place , and there prayed .
And Simon and they that were with him followed after him .
And when they had found him , they said unto him , All men seek for thee .
And he said unto them , Let us go into the next towns , that I may preach there also : for therefore came I forth .
And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee , and cast out devils .
And there came a leper to him , beseeching him , and kneeling down to him , and saying unto him , If thou wilt , thou canst make me clean .
And Jesus , moved with compassion , put forth his hand , and touched him , and saith unto him , I will ; be thou clean .
And as soon as he had spoken , immediately the leprosy departed from him , and he was cleansed .
But he went out , and began to publish it much , and to blaze abroad the matter , insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city , but was without in desert places : and they came to him from every quarter .
And again he entered into Capernaum , after some days ; and it was noised that he was in the house .
And they come unto him , bringing one sick of the palsy , which was borne of four .
And when they could not come nigh unto him for the press , they uncovered the roof where he was : and when they had broken it up , they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay .
When Jesus saw their faith , he said unto the sick of the palsy , Son , thy sins be forgiven thee .
But there were certain of the scribes sitting there , and reasoning in their hearts ,
And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves , he said unto them , Why reason ye these things in your hearts ?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins , ( he saith to the sick of the palsy , )
And immediately he arose , took up the bed , and went forth before them all ; insomuch that they were all amazed , and glorified God , saying , We never saw it on this fashion .
And he went forth again by the sea side ; and all the multitude resorted unto him , and he taught them .
And as he passed by , he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the receipt of custom , and said unto him , Follow me . And he arose and followed him .
And it came to pass , that , as Jesus sat at meat in his house , many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his disciples : for there were many , and they followed him .
And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and sinners , they said unto his disciples , How is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners ?
When Jesus heard it , he saith unto them , They that are whole have no need of the physician , but they that are sick : I came not to call the righteous , but sinners to repentance .
And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast : and they come and say unto him , Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast , but thy disciples fast not ?
And Jesus said unto them , Can the children of the bridechamber fast , while the bridegroom is with them ? as long as they have the bridegroom with them , they cannot fast .
But the days will come , when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them , and then shall they fast in those days .
No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment : else the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old , and the rent is made worse .
And it came to pass , that he went through the corn fields on the sabbath day ; and his disciples began , as they went , to pluck the ears of corn .
And the Pharisees said unto him , Behold , why do they on the sabbath day that which is not lawful ?
And he said unto them , Have ye never read what David did , when he had need , and was an hungred , he , and they that were with him ?
And he said unto them , The sabbath was made for man , and not man for the sabbath :
Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath .
And he entered again into the synagogue ; and there was a man there which had a withered hand .
And they watched him , whether he would heal him on the sabbath day ; that they might accuse him .
And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand , Stand forth .
And he saith unto them , Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days , or to do evil ? to save life , or to kill ? But they held their peace .
And when he had looked round about on them with anger , being grieved for the hardness of their hearts , he saith unto the man , Stretch forth thine hand . And he stretched it out : and his hand was restored whole as the other .
And the Pharisees went forth , and straightway took counsel with the Herodians against him , how they might destroy him .
And he spake to his disciples , that a small ship should wait on him because of the multitude , lest they should throng him .
And unclean spirits , when they saw him , fell down before him , and cried , saying , Thou art the Son of God .
And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known .
And he goeth up into a mountain , and calleth unto him whom he would : and they came unto him .
And when his friends heard of it , they went out to lay hold on him : for they said , He is beside himself .
And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said , He hath Beelzebub , and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils .
And he called them unto him , and said unto them in parables , How can Satan cast out Satan ?
And if a kingdom be divided against itself , that kingdom cannot stand .
And if a house be divided against itself , that house cannot stand .
And if Satan rise up against himself , and be divided , he cannot stand , but hath an end .
No man can enter into a strong man's house , and spoil his goods , except he will first bind the strong man ; and then he will spoil his house .
Verily I say unto you , All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men , and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme :
There came then his brethren and his mother , and , standing without , sent unto him , calling him .
And he answered them , saying , Who is my mother , or my brethren ?
For whosoever shall do the will of God , the same is my brother , and my sister , and mother .
And he began again to teach by the sea side : and there was gathered unto him a great multitude , so that he entered into a ship , and sat in the sea ; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land .
And it came to pass , as he sowed , some fell by the way side , and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up .
And some fell on stony ground , where it had not much earth ; and immediately it sprang up , because it had no depth of earth :
And some fell among thorns , and the thorns grew up , and choked it , and it yielded no fruit .
And other fell on good ground , and did yield fruit that sprang up and increased ; and brought forth , some thirty , and some sixty , and some an hundred .
And he said unto them , He that hath ears to hear , let him hear .
And when he was alone , they that were about him with the twelve asked of him the parable .
And he said unto them , Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God : but unto them that are without , all these things are done in parables :
And he said unto them , Know ye not this parable ? and how then will ye know all parables ?
And these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground ; who , when they have heard the word , immediately receive it with gladness ;
And these are they which are sown among thorns ; such as hear the word ,
And these are they which are sown on good ground ; such as hear the word , and receive it , and bring forth fruit , some thirtyfold , some sixty , and some an hundred .
And he said unto them , Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel , or under a bed ? and not to be set on a candlestick ?
If any man have ears to hear , let him hear .
And he said unto them , Take heed what ye hear : with what measure ye mete , it shall be measured to you : and unto you that hear shall more be given .
And he said , Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God ? or with what comparison shall we compare it ?
It is like a grain of mustard seed , which , when it is sown in the earth , is less than all the seeds that be in the earth :
And with many such parables spake he the word unto them , as they were able to hear it .
And the same day , when the even was come , he saith unto them , Let us pass over unto the other side .
And there arose a great storm of wind , and the waves beat into the ship , so that it was now full .
And he was in the hinder part of the ship , asleep on a pillow : and they awake him , and say unto him , Master , carest thou not that we perish ?
And he arose , and rebuked the wind , and said unto the sea , Peace , be still . And the wind ceased , and there was a great calm .
And they came over unto the other side of the sea , into the country of the Gadarenes .
And when he was come out of the ship , immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit ,
And he asked him , What is thy name ? And he answered , saying , My name is Legion : for we are many .
And he besought him much that he would not send them away out of the country .
Now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine feeding .
And forthwith Jesus gave them leave . And the unclean spirits went out , and entered into the swine : and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea , ( they were about two thousand ; ) and were choked in the sea .
And they that fed the swine fled , and told it in the city , and in the country . And they went out to see what it was that was done .
And they come to Jesus , and see him that was possessed with the devil , and had the legion , sitting , and clothed , and in his right mind : and they were afraid .
And they that saw it told them how it befell to him that was possessed with the devil , and also concerning the swine .
And they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts .
And when he was come into the ship , he that had been possessed with the devil prayed him that he might be with him .
Howbeit Jesus suffered him not , but saith unto him , Go home to thy friends , and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee , and hath had compassion on thee .
And he departed , and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him : and all men did marvel .
And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side , much people gathered unto him : and he was nigh unto the sea .
And , behold , there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue , Jairus by name ; and when he saw him , he fell at his feet ,
And Jesus went with him ; and much people followed him , and thronged him .
And a certain woman , which had an issue of blood twelve years ,
And had suffered many things of many physicians , and had spent all that she had , and was nothing bettered , but rather grew worse ,
And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up ; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague .
And Jesus , immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him , turned him about in the press , and said , Who touched my clothes ?
And his disciples said unto him , Thou seest the multitude thronging thee , and sayest thou , Who touched me ?
And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing .
But the woman fearing and trembling , knowing what was done in her , came and fell down before him , and told him all the truth .
And he said unto her , Daughter , thy faith hath made thee whole ; go in peace , and be whole of thy plague .
While he yet spake , there came from the ruler of the synagogue's house certain which said , Thy daughter is dead : why troublest thou the Master any further ?
As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken , he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue , Be not afraid , only believe .
And he suffered no man to follow him , save Peter , and James , and John the brother of James .
And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue , and seeth the tumult , and them that wept and wailed greatly .
And when he was come in , he saith unto them , Why make ye this ado , and weep ? the damsel is not dead , but sleepeth .
And they laughed him to scorn . But when he had put them all out , he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel , and them that were with him , and entereth in where the damsel was lying .
And he took the damsel by the hand , and said unto her , Talitha cumi ; which is , being interpreted , Damsel , I say unto thee , arise .
And straightway the damsel arose , and walked ; for she was of the age of twelve years . And they were astonished with a great astonishment .
And he went out from thence , and came into his own country ; and his disciples follow him .
And when the sabbath day was come , he began to teach in the synagogue : and many hearing him were astonished , saying , From whence hath this man these things ? and what wisdom is this which is given unto him , that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands ?
But Jesus said unto them , A prophet is not without honour , but in his own country , and among his own kin , and in his own house .
And he could there do no mighty work , save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk , and healed them .
And he marvelled because of their unbelief . And he went round about the villages , teaching .
And he called unto him the twelve , and began to send them forth by two and two ; and gave them power over unclean spirits ;
And they went out , and preached that men should repent .
And they cast out many devils , and anointed with oil many that were sick , and healed them .
And king Herod heard of him ; ( for his name was spread abroad : ) and he said , That John the Baptist was risen from the dead , and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him .
Then came together unto him the Pharisees , and certain of the scribes , which came from Jerusalem .
Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him , Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders , but eat bread with unwashen hands ?
He answered and said unto them , Well hath Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites , as it is written , This people honoureth me with their lips , but their heart is far from me .
And when he was entered into the house from the people , his disciples asked him concerning the parable .
And he said , That which cometh out of the man , that defileth the man .
And from thence he arose , and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon , and entered into an house , and would have no man know it : but he could not be hid .
For a certain woman , whose young daughter had an unclean spirit , heard of him , and came and fell at his feet :
But Jesus said unto her , Let the children first be filled : for it is not meet to take the children's bread , and to cast it unto the dogs .
And she answered and said unto him , Yes , Lord : yet the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs .
And he said unto her , For this saying go thy way ; the devil is gone out of thy daughter .
And when she was come to her house , she found the devil gone out , and her daughter laid upon the bed .
And again , departing from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon , he came unto the sea of Galilee , through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis .
And they bring unto him one that was deaf , and had an impediment in his speech ; and they beseech him to put his hand upon him .
And he took him aside from the multitude , and put his fingers into his ears , and he spit , and touched his tongue ;
And looking up to heaven , he sighed , and saith unto him , Ephphatha , that is , Be opened .
And straightway his ears were opened , and the string of his tongue was loosed , and he spake plain .
And he charged them that they should tell no man : but the more he charged them , so much the more a great deal they published it ;
And were beyond measure astonished , saying , He hath done all things well : he maketh both the deaf to hear , and the dumb to speak .
In those days the multitude being very great , and having nothing to eat , Jesus called his disciples unto him , and saith unto them ,
And if I send them away fasting to their own houses , they will faint by the way : for divers of them came from far .
And his disciples answered him , From whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness ?
And he asked them , How many loaves have ye ? And they said , Seven .
And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground : and he took the seven loaves , and gave thanks , and brake , and gave to his disciples to set before them ; and they did set them before the people .
And they had a few small fishes : and he blessed , and commanded to set them also before them .
So they did eat , and were filled : and they took up of the broken meat that was left seven baskets .
And the Pharisees came forth , and began to question with him , seeking of him a sign from heaven , tempting him .
And he sighed deeply in his spirit , and saith , Why doth this generation seek after a sign ? verily I say unto you , There shall no sign be given unto this generation .
And he left them , and entering into the ship again departed to the other side .
Now the disciples had forgotten to take bread , neither had they in the ship with them more than one loaf .
And he charged them , saying , Take heed , beware of the leaven of the Pharisees , and of the leaven of Herod .
And they reasoned among themselves , saying , It is because we have no bread .
And when Jesus knew it , he saith unto them , Why reason ye , because ye have no bread ? perceive ye not yet , neither understand ? have ye your heart yet hardened ?
Having eyes , see ye not ? and having ears , hear ye not ? and do ye not remember ?
And when the seven among four thousand , how many baskets full of fragments took ye up ? And they said , Seven .
And he said unto them , How is it that ye do not understand ?
And he took the blind man by the hand , and led him out of the town ; and when he had spit on his eyes , and put his hands upon him , he asked him if he saw ought .
And Jesus went out , and his disciples , into the towns of Caesarea Philippi : and by the way he asked his disciples , saying unto them , Whom do men say that I am ?
And they answered , John the Baptist : but some say , Elias ; and others , One of the prophets .
And he charged them that they should tell no man of him .
And he began to teach them , that the Son of man must suffer many things , and be rejected of the elders , and of the chief priests , and scribes , and be killed , and after three days rise again .
And he spake that saying openly . And Peter took him , and began to rebuke him .
But when he had turned about and looked on his disciples , he rebuked Peter , saying , Get thee behind me , Satan : for thou savourest not the things that be of God , but the things that be of men .
And when he had called the people unto him with his disciples also , he said unto them , Whosoever will come after me , let him deny himself , and take up his cross , and follow me .
And after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter , and James , and John , and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves : and he was transfigured before them .
And his raiment became shining , exceeding white as snow ; so as no fuller on earth can white them .
And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses : and they were talking with Jesus .
And Peter answered and said to Jesus , Master , it is good for us to be here : and let us make three tabernacles ; one for thee , and one for Moses , and one for Elias .
And there was a cloud that overshadowed them : and a voice came out of the cloud , saying , This is my beloved Son : hear him .
And suddenly , when they had looked round about , they saw no man any more , save Jesus only with themselves .
And as they came down from the mountain , he charged them that they should tell no man what things they had seen , till the Son of man were risen from the dead .
And they kept that saying with themselves , questioning one with another what the rising from the dead should mean .
And they asked him , saying , Why say the scribes that Elias must first come ?
And he answered and told them , Elias verily cometh first , and restoreth all things ; and how it is written of the Son of man , that he must suffer many things , and be set at nought .
And when he came to his disciples , he saw a great multitude about them , and the scribes questioning with them .
And straightway all the people , when they beheld him , were greatly amazed , and running to him saluted him .
And he asked the scribes , What question ye with them ?
And one of the multitude answered and said , Master , I have brought unto thee my son , which hath a dumb spirit ;
And wheresoever he taketh him , he teareth him : and he foameth , and gnasheth with his teeth , and pineth away : and I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him out ; and they could not .
He answereth him , and saith , O faithless generation , how long shall I be with you ? how long shall I suffer you ? bring him unto me .
And they brought him unto him : and when he saw him , straightway the spirit tare him ; and he fell on the ground , and wallowed foaming .
And he asked his father , How long is it ago since this came unto him ? And he said , Of a child .
And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire , and into the waters , to destroy him : but if thou canst do any thing , have compassion on us , and help us .
Jesus said unto him , If thou canst believe , all things are possible to him that believeth .
And straightway the father of the child cried out , and said with tears , Lord , I believe ; help thou mine unbelief .
When Jesus saw that the people came running together , he rebuked the foul spirit , saying unto him , Thou dumb and deaf spirit , I charge thee , come out of him , and enter no more into him .
And the spirit cried , and rent him sore , and came out of him : and he was as one dead ; insomuch that many said , He is dead .
But Jesus took him by the hand , and lifted him up ; and he arose .
And when he was come into the house , his disciples asked him privately , Why could not we cast him out ?
And he said unto them , This kind can come forth by nothing , but by prayer and fasting .
And they departed thence , and passed through Galilee ; and he would not that any man should know it .
But they understood not that saying , and were afraid to ask him .
And he came to Capernaum : and being in the house he asked them , What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way ?
And he sat down , and called the twelve , and saith unto them , If any man desire to be first , the same shall be last of all , and servant of all .
And he took a child , and set him in the midst of them : and when he had taken him in his arms , he said unto them ,
And John answered him , saying , Master , we saw one casting out devils in thy name , and he followeth not us : and we forbad him , because he followeth not us .
But Jesus said , Forbid him not : for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name , that can lightly speak evil of me .
And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me , it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck , and he were cast into the sea .
And if thy hand offend thee , cut it off : it is better for thee to enter into life maimed , than having two hands to go into hell , into the fire that never shall be quenched :
Where their worm dieth not , and the fire is not quenched .
For every one shall be salted with fire , and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt .
Salt is good : but if the salt have lost his saltness , wherewith will ye season it ? Have salt in yourselves , and have peace one with another .
And he arose from thence , and cometh into the coasts of Judaea by the farther side of Jordan : and the people resort unto him again ; and , as he was wont , he taught them again .
And the Pharisees came to him , and asked him , Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife ? tempting him .
And he answered and said unto them , What did Moses command you ?
And they said , Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement , and to put her away .
And Jesus answered and said unto them , For the hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept .
But from the beginning of the creation God made them male and female .
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother , and cleave to his wife ;
What therefore God hath joined together , let not man put asunder .
And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same matter .
And he saith unto them , Whosoever shall put away his wife , and marry another , committeth adultery against her .
And if a woman shall put away her husband , and be married to another , she committeth adultery .
And they brought young children to him , that he should touch them : and his disciples rebuked those that brought them .
But when Jesus saw it , he was much displeased , and said unto them , Suffer the little children to come unto me , and forbid them not : for of such is the kingdom of God .
Verily I say unto you , Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child , he shall not enter therein .
And he took them up in his arms , put his hands upon them , and blessed them .
And when he was gone forth into the way , there came one running , and kneeled to him , and asked him , Good Master , what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life ?
And Jesus said unto him , Why callest thou me good ? there is none good but one , that is , God .
Thou knowest the commandments , Do not commit adultery , Do not kill , Do not steal , Do not bear false witness , Defraud not , Honour thy father and mother .
And he answered and said unto him , Master , all these have I observed from my youth .
Then Jesus beholding him loved him , and said unto him , One thing thou lackest : go thy way , sell whatsoever thou hast , and give to the poor , and thou shalt have treasure in heaven : and come , take up the cross , and follow me .
And he was sad at that saying , and went away grieved : for he had great possessions .
And Jesus looked round about , and saith unto his disciples , How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God !
And the disciples were astonished at his words . But Jesus answereth again , and saith unto them , Children , how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God !
And they were astonished out of measure , saying among themselves , Who then can be saved ?
And Jesus looking upon them saith , With men it is impossible , but not with God : for with God all things are possible .
Then Peter began to say unto him , Lo , we have left all , and have followed thee .
And Jesus answered and said , Verily I say unto you , There is no man that hath left house , or brethren , or sisters , or father , or mother , or wife , or children , or lands , for my sake , and the gospel's ,
But many that are first shall be last ; and the last first .
And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem ; and Jesus went before them : and they were amazed ; and as they followed , they were afraid . And he took again the twelve , and began to tell them what things should happen unto him ,
And they shall mock him , and shall scourge him , and shall spit upon him , and shall kill him : and the third day he shall rise again .
And James and John , the sons of Zebedee , come unto him , saying , Master , we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall desire .
And he said unto them , What would ye that I should do for you ?
They said unto him , Grant unto us that we may sit , one on thy right hand , and the other on thy left hand , in thy glory .
But Jesus said unto them , Ye know not what ye ask : can ye drink of the cup that I drink of ? and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with ?
And they said unto him , We can . And Jesus said unto them , Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of ; and with the baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be baptized :
And when the ten heard it , they began to be much displeased with James and John .
But Jesus called them to him , and saith unto them , Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them ; and their great ones exercise authority upon them .
But so shall it not be among you : but whosoever will be great among you , shall be your minister :
For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto , but to minister , and to give his life a ransom for many .
And they came to Jericho : and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples and a great number of people , blind Bartimaeus , the son of Timaeus , sat by the highway side begging .
And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth , he began to cry out , and say , Jesus , thou Son of David , have mercy on me .
And many charged him that he should hold his peace : but he cried the more a great deal , Thou Son of David , have mercy on me .
And Jesus stood still , and commanded him to be called . And they call the blind man , saying unto him , Be of good comfort , rise ; he calleth thee .
And he , casting away his garment , rose , and came to Jesus .
And Jesus answered and said unto him , What wilt thou that I should do unto thee ? The blind man said unto him , Lord , that I might receive my sight .
And Jesus said unto him , Go thy way ; thy faith hath made thee whole . And immediately he received his sight , and followed Jesus in the way .
And when they came nigh to Jerusalem , unto Bethphage and Bethany , at the mount of Olives , he sendeth forth two of his disciples ,
And if any man say unto you , Why do ye this ? say ye that the Lord hath need of him ; and straightway he will send him hither .
And they went their way , and found the colt tied by the door without in a place where two ways met ; and they loose him .
And they said unto them even as Jesus had commanded : and they let them go .
And they brought the colt to Jesus , and cast their garments on him ; and he sat upon him .
And many spread their garments in the way : and others cut down branches off the trees , and strawed them in the way .
And they that went before , and they that followed , cried , saying , Hosanna ; Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord :
Blessed be the kingdom of our father David , that cometh in the name of the Lord : Hosanna in the highest .
And Jesus entered into Jerusalem , and into the temple : and when he had looked round about upon all things , and now the eventide was come , he went out unto Bethany with the twelve .
And on the morrow , when they were come from Bethany , he was hungry :
And Jesus answered and said unto it , No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever . And his disciples heard it .
And they come to Jerusalem : and Jesus went into the temple , and began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple , and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers , and the seats of them that sold doves ;
And would not suffer that any man should carry any vessel through the temple .
And he taught , saying unto them , Is it not written , My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer ? but ye have made it a den of thieves .
And the scribes and chief priests heard it , and sought how they might destroy him : for they feared him , because all the people was astonished at his doctrine .
And when even was come , he went out of the city .
And in the morning , as they passed by , they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots .
And Peter calling to remembrance saith unto him , Master , behold , the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away .
And Jesus answering saith unto them , Have faith in God .
Therefore I say unto you , What things soever ye desire , when ye pray , believe that ye receive them , and ye shall have them .
And when ye stand praying , forgive , if ye have ought against any : that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses .
And they come again to Jerusalem : and as he was walking in the temple , there come to him the chief priests , and the scribes , and the elders ,
And Jesus answered and said unto them , I will also ask of you one question , and answer me , and I will tell you by what authority I do these things .
And they reasoned with themselves , saying , If we shall say , From heaven ; he will say , Why then did ye not believe him ?
But if we shall say , Of men ; they feared the people : for all men counted John , that he was a prophet indeed .
And they answered and said unto Jesus , We cannot tell . And Jesus answering saith unto them , Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things .
And he began to speak unto them by parables . A certain man planted a vineyard , and set an hedge about it , and digged a place for the winefat , and built a tower , and let it out to husbandmen , and went into a far country .
And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant , that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard .
And they caught him , and beat him , and sent him away empty .
And again he sent unto them another servant ; and at him they cast stones , and wounded him in the head , and sent him away shamefully handled .
And again he sent another ; and him they killed , and many others ; beating some , and killing some .
Having yet therefore one son , his wellbeloved , he sent him also last unto them , saying , They will reverence my son .
But those husbandmen said among themselves , This is the heir ; come , let us kill him , and the inheritance shall be ours .
And they took him , and killed him , and cast him out of the vineyard .
What shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do ? he will come and destroy the husbandmen , and will give the vineyard unto others .
And have ye not read this scripture ; The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner :
And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians , to catch him in his words .
And when they were come , they say unto him , Master , we know that thou art true , and carest for no man : for thou regardest not the person of men , but teachest the way of God in truth : Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar , or not ?
Shall we give , or shall we not give ? But he , knowing their hypocrisy , said unto them , Why tempt ye me ? bring me a penny , that I may see it .
And they brought it . And he saith unto them , Whose is this image and superscription ? And they said unto him , Caesar's .
And Jesus answering said unto them , Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's , and to God the things that are God's . And they marvelled at him .
Then come unto him the Sadducees , which say there is no resurrection ; and they asked him , saying ,
Now there were seven brethren : and the first took a wife , and dying left no seed .
In the resurrection therefore , when they shall rise , whose wife shall she be of them ? for the seven had her to wife .
And Jesus answering said unto them , Do ye not therefore err , because ye know not the scriptures , neither the power of God ?
For when they shall rise from the dead , they neither marry , nor are given in marriage ; but are as the angels which are in heaven .
And as touching the dead , that they rise : have ye not read in the book of Moses , how in the bush God spake unto him , saying , I am the God of Abraham , and the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob ?
And one of the scribes came , and having heard them reasoning together , and perceiving that he had answered them well , asked him , Which is the first commandment of all ?
And Jesus answered him , The first of all the commandments is , Hear , O Israel ; The Lord our God is one Lord :
And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart , and with all thy soul , and with all thy mind , and with all thy strength : this is the first commandment .
And the second is like , namely this , Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself . There is none other commandment greater than these .
And the scribe said unto him , Well , Master , thou hast said the truth : for there is one God ; and there is none other but he :
And to love him with all the heart , and with all the understanding , and with all the soul , and with all the strength , and to love his neighbour as himself , is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices .
And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly , he said unto him , Thou art not far from the kingdom of God . And no man after that durst ask him any question .
And Jesus answered and said , while he taught in the temple , How say the scribes that Christ is the Son of David ?
For David himself said by the Holy Ghost , The Lord said to my Lord , Sit thou on my right hand , till I make thine enemies thy footstool .
And he said unto them in his doctrine , Beware of the scribes , which love to go in long clothing , and love salutations in the marketplaces ,
Which devour widows' houses , and for a pretence make long prayers : these shall receive greater damnation .
And Jesus sat over against the treasury , and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury : and many that were rich cast in much .
And there came a certain poor widow , and she threw in two mites , which make a farthing .
And he called unto him his disciples , and saith unto them , Verily I say unto you , That this poor widow hath cast more in , than all they which have cast into the treasury :
For all they did cast in of their abundance ; but she of her want did cast in all that she had , even all her living .
And as he went out of the temple , one of his disciples saith unto him , Master , see what manner of stones and what buildings are here !
And Jesus answering said unto him , Seest thou these great buildings ? there shall not be left one stone upon another , that shall not be thrown down .
And as he sat upon the mount of Olives over against the temple , Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately ,
And Jesus answering them began to say , Take heed lest any man deceive you :
And when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars , be ye not troubled : for such things must needs be ; but the end shall not be yet .
For nation shall rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom : and there shall be earthquakes in divers places , and there shall be famines and troubles : these are the beginnings of sorrows .
But take heed to yourselves : for they shall deliver you up to councils ; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten : and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake , for a testimony against them .
And the gospel must first be published among all nations .
But when they shall lead you , and deliver you up , take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak , neither do ye premeditate : but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour , that speak ye : for it is not ye that speak , but the Holy Ghost .
Now the brother shall betray the brother to death , and the father the son ; and children shall rise up against their parents , and shall cause them to be put to death .
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake : but he that shall endure unto the end , the same shall be saved .
But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation , spoken of by Daniel the prophet , standing where it ought not , ( let him that readeth understand , ) then let them that be in Judaea flee to the mountains :
And let him that is on the housetop not go down into the house , neither enter therein , to take any thing out of his house :
And let him that is in the field not turn back again for to take up his garment .
But woe to them that are with child , and to them that give suck in those days !
And pray ye that your flight be not in the winter .
For in those days shall be affliction , such as was not from the beginning of the creation which God created unto this time , neither shall be .
And except that the Lord had shortened those days , no flesh should be saved : but for the elect's sake , whom he hath chosen , he hath shortened the days .
And then if any man shall say to you , Lo , here is Christ ; or , lo , he is there ; believe him not :
For false Christs and false prophets shall rise , and shall shew signs and wonders , to seduce , if it were possible , even the elect .
But take ye heed : behold , I have foretold you all things .
But in those days , after that tribulation , the sun shall be darkened , and the moon shall not give her light ,
And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory .
And then shall he send his angels , and shall gather together his elect from the four winds , from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven .
Now learn a parable of the fig tree ; When her branch is yet tender , and putteth forth leaves , ye know that summer is near :
Verily I say unto you , that this generation shall not pass , till all these things be done .
Heaven and earth shall pass away : but my words shall not pass away .
But of that day and that hour knoweth no man , no , not the angels which are in heaven , neither the Son , but the Father .
Take ye heed , watch and pray : for ye know not when the time is .
For the Son of man is as a man taking a far journey , who left his house , and gave authority to his servants , and to every man his work , and commanded the porter to watch .
Watch ye therefore : for ye know not when the master of the house cometh , at even , or at midnight , or at the cockcrowing , or in the morning :
And what I say unto you I say unto all , Watch .
After two days was the feast of the passover , and of unleavened bread : and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might take him by craft , and put him to death .
And being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper , as he sat at meat , there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of spikenard very precious ; and she brake the box , and poured it on his head .
And there were some that had indignation within themselves , and said , Why was this waste of the ointment made ?
And Jesus said , Let her alone ; why trouble ye her ? she hath wrought a good work on me .
For ye have the poor with you always , and whensoever ye will ye may do them good : but me ye have not always .
She hath done what she could : she is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying .
Verily I say unto you , Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world , this also that she hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her .
And Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve , went unto the chief priests , to betray him unto them .
And when they heard it , they were glad , and promised to give him money . And he sought how he might conveniently betray him .
And the first day of unleavened bread , when they killed the passover , his disciples said unto him , Where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou mayest eat the passover ?
And he sendeth forth two of his disciples , and saith unto them , Go ye into the city , and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water : follow him .
And wheresoever he shall go in , say ye to the goodman of the house , The Master saith , Where is the guestchamber , where I shall eat the passover with my disciples ?
And he will shew you a large upper room furnished and prepared : there make ready for us .
And his disciples went forth , and came into the city , and found as he had said unto them : and they made ready the passover .
And in the evening he cometh with the twelve .
And as they sat and did eat , Jesus said , Verily I say unto you , One of you which eateth with me shall betray me .
And they began to be sorrowful , and to say unto him one by one , Is it I ? and another said , Is it I ?
And he answered and said unto them , It is one of the twelve , that dippeth with me in the dish .
The Son of man indeed goeth , as it is written of him : but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed ! good were it for that man if he had never been born .
And as they did eat , Jesus took bread , and blessed , and brake it , and gave to them , and said , Take , eat : this is my body .
And he took the cup , and when he had given thanks , he gave it to them : and they all drank of it .
And he said unto them , This is my blood of the new testament , which is shed for many .
Verily I say unto you , I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine , until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God .
And when they had sung an hymn , they went out into the mount of Olives .
And Jesus saith unto them , All ye shall be offended because of me this night : for it is written , I will smite the shepherd , and the sheep shall be scattered .
And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane : and he saith to his disciples , Sit ye here , while I shall pray .
And he taketh with him Peter and James and John , and began to be sore amazed , and to be very heavy ;
And saith unto them , My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death : tarry ye here , and watch .
And he cometh , and findeth them sleeping , and saith unto Peter , Simon , sleepest thou ? couldest not thou watch one hour ?
Watch ye and pray , lest ye enter into temptation . The spirit truly is ready , but the flesh is weak .
And again he went away , and prayed , and spake the same words .
And when he returned , he found them asleep again , ( for their eyes were heavy , ) neither wist they what to answer him .
And he cometh the third time , and saith unto them , Sleep on now , and take your rest : it is enough , the hour is come ; behold , the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners .
Rise up , let us go ; lo , he that betrayeth me is at hand .
And immediately , while he yet spake , cometh Judas , one of the twelve , and with him a great multitude with swords and staves , from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders .
And he that betrayed him had given them a token , saying , Whomsoever I shall kiss , that same is he ; take him , and lead him away safely .
And they laid their hands on him , and took him .
And one of them that stood by drew a sword , and smote a servant of the high priest , and cut off his ear .
And Jesus answered and said unto them , Are ye come out , as against a thief , with swords and with staves to take me ?
I was daily with you in the temple teaching , and ye took me not : but the scriptures must be fulfilled .
And they all forsook him , and fled .
And there followed him a certain young man , having a linen cloth cast about his naked body ; and the young men laid hold on him :
And they led Jesus away to the high priest : and with him were assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes .
And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness against Jesus to put him to death ; and found none .
For many bare false witness against him , but their witness agreed not together .
But neither so did their witness agree together .
And the high priest stood up in the midst , and asked Jesus , saying , Answerest thou nothing ? what is it which these witness against thee ?
But he held his peace , and answered nothing . Again the high priest asked him , and said unto him , Art thou the Christ , the Son of the Blessed ?
And Jesus said , I am : and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power , and coming in the clouds of heaven .
Then the high priest rent his clothes , and saith , What need we any further witnesses ?
And some began to spit on him , and to cover his face , and to buffet him , and to say unto him , Prophesy : and the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands .
And as Peter was beneath in the palace , there cometh one of the maids of the high priest :
But he denied , saying , I know not , neither understand I what thou sayest . And he went out into the porch ; and the cock crew .
And a maid saw him again , and began to say to them that stood by , This is one of them .
And he denied it again . And a little after , they that stood by said again to Peter , Surely thou art one of them : for thou art a Galilaean , and thy speech agreeth thereto .
But he began to curse and to swear , saying , I know not this man of whom ye speak .
And the second time the cock crew . And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him , Before the cock crow twice , thou shalt deny me thrice . And when he thought thereon , he wept .
And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council , and bound Jesus , and carried him away , and delivered him to Pilate .
And Pilate asked him , Art thou the King of the Jews ? And he answering said unto him , Thou sayest it .
And the chief priests accused him of many things : but he answered nothing .
And Pilate asked him again , saying , Answerest thou nothing ? behold how many things they witness against thee .
But Jesus yet answered nothing ; so that Pilate marvelled .
Now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner , whomsoever they desired .
And Pilate answered and said again unto them , What will ye then that I shall do unto him whom ye call the King of the Jews ?
And they cried out again , Crucify him .
Then Pilate said unto them , Why , what evil hath he done ? And they cried out the more exceedingly , Crucify him .
And so Pilate , willing to content the people , released Barabbas unto them , and delivered Jesus , when he had scourged him , to be crucified .
And the soldiers led him away into the hall , called Praetorium ; and they call together the whole band .
And they clothed him with purple , and platted a crown of thorns , and put it about his head ,
And began to salute him , Hail , King of the Jews !
And they smote him on the head with a reed , and did spit upon him , and bowing their knees worshipped him .
And when they had mocked him , they took off the purple from him , and put his own clothes on him , and led him out to crucify him .
And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian , who passed by , coming out of the country , the father of Alexander and Rufus , to bear his cross .
And they bring him unto the place Golgotha , which is , being interpreted , The place of a skull .
And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh : but he received it not .
And when they had crucified him , they parted his garments , casting lots upon them , what every man should take .
And with him they crucify two thieves ; the one on his right hand , and the other on his left .
And they that passed by railed on him , wagging their heads , and saying , Ah , thou that destroyest the temple , and buildest it in three days ,
Likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves with the scribes , He saved others ; himself he cannot save .
Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross , that we may see and believe . And they that were crucified with him reviled him .
And when the sixth hour was come , there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour .
And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice , saying , Eloi , Eloi , lama sabachthani ? which is , being interpreted , My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ?
And some of them that stood by , when they heard it , said , Behold , he calleth Elias .
And one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar , and put it on a reed , and gave him to drink , saying , Let alone ; let us see whether Elias will come to take him down .
And Jesus cried with a loud voice , and gave up the ghost .
And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom .
And when the centurion , which stood over against him , saw that he so cried out , and gave up the ghost , he said , Truly this man was the Son of God .
There were also women looking on afar off : among whom was Mary Magdalene , and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses , and Salome ;
And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead : and calling unto him the centurion , he asked him whether he had been any while dead .
And he bought fine linen , and took him down , and wrapped him in the linen , and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock , and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre .
And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses beheld where he was laid .
And when the sabbath was past , Mary Magdalene , and Mary the mother of James , and Salome , had bought sweet spices , that they might come and anoint him .
And very early in the morning the first day of the week , they came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun .
And entering into the sepulchre , they saw a young man sitting on the right side , clothed in a long white garment ; and they were affrighted .
And he saith unto them , Be not affrighted : Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth , which was crucified : he is risen ; he is not here : behold the place where they laid him .
But go your way , tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee : there shall ye see him , as he said unto you .
And they went out quickly , and fled from the sepulchre ; for they trembled and were amazed : neither said they any thing to any man ; for they were afraid .
Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week , he appeared first to Mary Magdalene , out of whom he had cast seven devils .
And she went and told them that had been with him , as they mourned and wept .
After that he appeared in another form unto two of them , as they walked , and went into the country .
And they went and told it unto the residue : neither believed they them .
Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat , and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart , because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen .
And he said unto them , Go ye into all the world , and preach the gospel to every creature .
He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved ; but he that believeth not shall be damned .
And these signs shall follow them that believe ; In my name shall they cast out devils ; they shall speak with new tongues ;
So then after the Lord had spoken unto them , he was received up into heaven , and sat on the right hand of God .
And they went forth , and preached everywhere , the Lord working with them , and confirming the word with signs following . Amen .
There was in the days of Herod , the king of Judaea , a certain priest named Zacharias , of the course of Abia : and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron , and her name was Elisabeth .
And they were both righteous before God , walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless .
And it came to pass , that while he executed the priest's office before God in the order of his course ,
And Zacharias said unto the angel , Whereby shall I know this ? for I am an old man , and my wife well stricken in years .
And the angel answering said unto him , I am Gabriel , that stand in the presence of God ; and am sent to speak unto thee , and to shew thee these glad tidings .
And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee , named Nazareth ,
And the angel came in unto her , and said , Hail , thou that art highly favoured , the Lord is with thee : blessed art thou among women .
And when she saw him , she was troubled at his saying , and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be .
And the angel said unto her , Fear not , Mary : for thou hast found favour with God .
And , behold , thou shalt conceive in thy womb , and bring forth a son , and shalt call his name JESUS .
He shall be great , and shall be called the Son of the Highest : and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David :
And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever ; and of his kingdom there shall be no end .
Then said Mary unto the angel , How shall this be , seeing I know not a man ?
And the angel answered and said unto her , The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee , and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee : therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God .
And , behold , thy cousin Elisabeth , she hath also conceived a son in her old age : and this is the sixth month with her , who was called barren .
For with God nothing shall be impossible .
And Mary said , Behold the handmaid of the Lord ; be it unto me according to thy word . And the angel departed from her .
And Mary said , My soul doth magnify the Lord ,
And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had shewed great mercy upon her ; and they rejoiced with her .
And it came to pass , that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child ; and they called him Zacharias , after the name of his father .
And all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts , saying , What manner of child shall this be ! And the hand of the Lord was with him .
And the child grew , and waxed strong in spirit , and was in the deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel .
And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child , his name was called JESUS , which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the womb .
And , behold , there was a man in Jerusalem , whose name was Simeon ; and the same man was just and devout , waiting for the consolation of Israel : and the Holy Ghost was upon him .
And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord , and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem .
And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord , they returned into Galilee , to their own city Nazareth .
And the child grew , and waxed strong in spirit , filled with wisdom : and the grace of God was upon him .
Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover .
And when they had fulfilled the days , as they returned , the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem ; and Joseph and his mother knew not of it .
And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers .
And he said unto them , How is it that ye sought me ? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business ?
And they understood not the saying which he spake unto them .
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature , and in favour with God and man .
Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar , Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea , and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee , and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis , and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene ,
Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests , the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness .
And he came into all the country about Jordan , preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins ;
As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet , saying , The voice of one crying in the wilderness , Prepare ye the way of the Lord , make his paths straight .
Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him , O generation of vipers , who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come ?
Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance , and begin not to say within yourselves , We have Abraham to our father : for I say unto you , That God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham .
And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees : every tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down , and cast into the fire .
And the people asked him , saying , What shall we do then ?
He answereth and saith unto them , He that hath two coats , let him impart to him that hath none ; and he that hath meat , let him do likewise .
Then came also publicans to be baptized , and said unto him , Master , what shall we do ?
And he said unto them , Exact no more than that which is appointed you .
And the soldiers likewise demanded of him , saying , And what shall we do ? And he said unto them , Do violence to no man , neither accuse any falsely ; and be content with your wages .
And as the people were in expectation , and all men mused in their hearts of John , whether he were the Christ , or not ;
John answered , saying unto them all , I indeed baptize you with water ; but one mightier than I cometh , the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose : he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire :
Whose fan is in his hand , and he will throughly purge his floor , and will gather the wheat into his garner ; but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable .
And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people .
But Herod the tetrarch , being reproved by him for Herodias his brother Philip's wife , and for all the evils which Herod had done ,
Now when all the people were baptized , it came to pass , that Jesus also being baptized , and praying , the heaven was opened ,
And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan , and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness ,
And the devil said unto him , If thou be the Son of God , command this stone that it be made bread .
And Jesus answered him , saying , It is written , That man shall not live by bread alone , but by every word of God .
And the devil , taking him up into an high mountain , shewed unto him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time .
And the devil said unto him , All this power will I give thee , and the glory of them : for that is delivered unto me ; and to whomsoever I will I give it .
And Jesus answered and said unto him , Get thee behind me , Satan : for it is written , Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God , and him only shalt thou serve .
And he brought him to Jerusalem , and set him on a pinnacle of the temple , and said unto him , If thou be the Son of God , cast thyself down from hence :
And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee : and there went out a fame of him through all the region round about .
And he taught in their synagogues , being glorified of all .
And he came to Nazareth , where he had been brought up : and , as his custom was , he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day , and stood up for to read .
And came down to Capernaum , a city of Galilee , and taught them on the sabbath days .
And in the synagogue there was a man , which had a spirit of an unclean devil , and cried out with a loud voice ,
And Jesus rebuked him , saying , Hold thy peace , and come out of him . And when the devil had thrown him in the midst , he came out of him , and hurt him not .
And they were all amazed , and spake among themselves , saying , What a word is this ! for with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits , and they come out .
And the fame of him went out into every place of the country round about .
And he arose out of the synagogue , and entered into Simon's house . And Simon's wife's mother was taken with a great fever ; and they besought him for her .
And he stood over her , and rebuked the fever ; and it left her : and immediately she arose and ministered unto them .
Now when the sun was setting , all they that had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto him ; and he laid his hands on every one of them , and healed them .
And devils also came out of many , crying out , and saying , Thou art Christ the Son of God . And he rebuking them suffered them not to speak : for they knew that he was Christ .
And when it was day , he departed and went into a desert place : and the people sought him , and came unto him , and stayed him , that he should not depart from them .
And he said unto them , I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also : for therefore am I sent .
And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee .
And it came to pass , that , as the people pressed upon him to hear the word of God , he stood by the lake of Gennesaret ,
And saw two ships standing by the lake : but the fishermen were gone out of them , and were washing their nets .
And he entered into one of the ships , which was Simon's , and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land . And he sat down , and taught the people out of the ship .
Now when he had left speaking , he said unto Simon , Launch out into the deep , and let down your nets for a draught .
And Simon answering said unto him , Master , we have toiled all the night , and have taken nothing : nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net .
And when they had this done , they inclosed a great multitude of fishes : and their net brake .
And they beckoned unto their partners , which were in the other ship , that they should come and help them . And they came , and filled both the ships , so that they began to sink .
And when they had brought their ships to land , they forsook all , and followed him .
And it came to pass , when he was in a certain city , behold a man full of leprosy : who seeing Jesus fell on his face , and besought him , saying , Lord , if thou wilt , thou canst make me clean .
And he put forth his hand , and touched him , saying , I will : be thou clean . And immediately the leprosy departed from him .
And he charged him to tell no man : but go , and shew thyself to the priest , and offer for thy cleansing , according as Moses commanded , for a testimony unto them .
But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him : and great multitudes came together to hear , and to be healed by him of their infirmities .
And he withdrew himself into the wilderness , and prayed .
And it came to pass on a certain day , as he was teaching , that there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by , which were come out of every town of Galilee , and Judaea , and Jerusalem : and the power of the Lord was present to heal them .
And , behold , men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a palsy : and they sought means to bring him in , and to lay him before him .
And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in because of the multitude , they went upon the housetop , and let him down through the tiling with his couch into the midst before Jesus .
And when he saw their faith , he said unto him , Man , thy sins are forgiven thee .
And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason , saying , Who is this which speaketh blasphemies ? Who can forgive sins , but God alone ?
But when Jesus perceived their thoughts , he answering said unto them , What reason ye in your hearts ?
Whether is easier , to say , Thy sins be forgiven thee ; or to say , Rise up and walk ?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power upon earth to forgive sins , ( he said unto the sick of the palsy , ) I say unto thee , Arise , and take up thy couch , and go into thine house .
And immediately he rose up before them , and took up that whereon he lay , and departed to his own house , glorifying God .
And they were all amazed , and they glorified God , and were filled with fear , saying , We have seen strange things to day .
And after these things he went forth , and saw a publican , named Levi , sitting at the receipt of custom : and he said unto him , Follow me .
And he left all , rose up , and followed him .
And Levi made him a great feast in his own house : and there was a great company of publicans and of others that sat down with them .
But their scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples , saying , Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners ?
And Jesus answering said unto them , They that are whole need not a physician ; but they that are sick .
I came not to call the righteous , but sinners to repentance .
And they said unto him , Why do the disciples of John fast often , and make prayers , and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees ; but thine eat and drink ?
And he said unto them , Can ye make the children of the bridechamber fast , while the bridegroom is with them ?
But the days will come , when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them , and then shall they fast in those days .
And he spake also a parable unto them ; No man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an old ; if otherwise , then both the new maketh a rent , and the piece that was taken out of the new agreeth not with the old .
And no man putteth new wine into old bottles ; else the new wine will burst the bottles , and be spilled , and the bottles shall perish .
But new wine must be put into new bottles ; and both are preserved .
No man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new : for he saith , The old is better .
And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first , that he went through the corn fields ; and his disciples plucked the ears of corn , and did eat , rubbing them in their hands .
And certain of the Pharisees said unto them , Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days ?
And Jesus answering them said , Have ye not read so much as this , what David did , when himself was an hungred , and they which were with him ;
How he went into the house of God , and did take and eat the shewbread , and gave also to them that were with him ; which it is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone ?
And he said unto them , That the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath .
And it came to pass also on another sabbath , that he entered into the synagogue and taught : and there was a man whose right hand was withered .
And the scribes and Pharisees watched him , whether he would heal on the sabbath day ; that they might find an accusation against him .
But he knew their thoughts , and said to the man which had the withered hand , Rise up , and stand forth in the midst . And he arose and stood forth .
Then said Jesus unto them , I will ask you one thing ; Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good , or to do evil ? to save life , or to destroy it ?
And looking round about upon them all , he said unto the man , Stretch forth thy hand . And he did so : and his hand was restored whole as the other .
And they were filled with madness ; and communed one with another what they might do to Jesus .
And it came to pass in those days , that he went out into a mountain to pray , and continued all night in prayer to God .
And when it was day , he called unto him his disciples : and of them he chose twelve , whom also he named apostles ;
And he came down with them , and stood in the plain , and the company of his disciples , and a great multitude of people out of all Judaea and Jerusalem , and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon , which came to hear him , and to be healed of their diseases ;
And the whole multitude sought to touch him : for there went virtue out of him , and healed them all .
And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples , and said , Blessed be ye poor : for yours is the kingdom of God .
Blessed are ye that hunger now : for ye shall be filled . Blessed are ye that weep now : for ye shall laugh .
Blessed are ye , when men shall hate you , and when they shall separate you from their company , and shall reproach you , and cast out your name as evil , for the Son of man's sake .
Rejoice ye in that day , and leap for joy : for , behold , your reward is great in heaven : for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets .
But woe unto you that are rich ! for ye have received your consolation .
Woe unto you that are full ! for ye shall hunger . Woe unto you that laugh now ! for ye shall mourn and weep .
But I say unto you which hear , Love your enemies , do good to them which hate you ,
And unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the other ; and him that taketh away thy cloke forbid not to take thy coat also .
Give to every man that asketh of thee ; and of him that taketh away thy goods ask them not again .
And as ye would that men should do to you , do ye also to them likewise .
For if ye love them which love you , what thank have ye ? for sinners also love those that love them .
And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive , what thank have ye ? for sinners also lend to sinners , to receive as much again .
But love ye your enemies , and do good , and lend , hoping for nothing again ; and your reward shall be great , and ye shall be the children of the Highest : for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil .
Be ye therefore merciful , as your Father also is merciful .
Judge not , and ye shall not be judged : condemn not , and ye shall not be condemned : forgive , and ye shall be forgiven :
Give , and it shall be given unto you ; good measure , pressed down , and shaken together , and running over , shall men give into your bosom . For with the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you again .
And he spake a parable unto them , Can the blind lead the blind ? shall they not both fall into the ditch ?
The disciple is not above his master : but every one that is perfect shall be as his master .
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye , but perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye ?
For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit ; neither doth a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit .
For every tree is known by his own fruit . For of thorns men do not gather figs , nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes .
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good ; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is evil : for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh .
And why call ye me , Lord , Lord , and do not the things which I say ?
Whosoever cometh to me , and heareth my sayings , and doeth them , I will shew you to whom he is like :
He is like a man which built an house , and digged deep , and laid the foundation on a rock : and when the flood arose , the stream beat vehemently upon that house , and could not shake it : for it was founded upon a rock .
But he that heareth , and doeth not , is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the earth ; against which the stream did beat vehemently , and immediately it fell ; and the ruin of that house was great .
Now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people , he entered into Capernaum .
And a certain centurion's servant , who was dear unto him , was sick , and ready to die .
And when he heard of Jesus , he sent unto him the elders of the Jews , beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant .
And when they came to Jesus , they besought him instantly , saying , That he was worthy for whom he should do this :
Then Jesus went with them . And when he was now not far from the house , the centurion sent friends to him , saying unto him , Lord , trouble not thyself : for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof :
Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee : but say in a word , and my servant shall be healed .
For I also am a man set under authority , having under me soldiers , and I say unto one , Go , and he goeth ; and to another , Come , and he cometh ; and to my servant , Do this , and he doeth it .
When Jesus heard these things , he marvelled at him , and turned him about , and said unto the people that followed him , I say unto you , I have not found so great faith , no , not in Israel .
And they that were sent , returning to the house , found the servant whole that had been sick .
And when the Lord saw her , he had compassion on her , and said unto her , Weep not .
And he came and touched the bier : and they that bare him stood still . And he said , Young man , I say unto thee , Arise .
And he that was dead sat up , and began to speak . And he delivered him to his mother .
And there came a fear on all : and they glorified God , saying , That a great prophet is risen up among us ; and , That God hath visited his people .
And the disciples of John shewed him of all these things .
When the men were come unto him , they said , John Baptist hath sent us unto thee , saying , Art thou he that should come ? or look we for another ?
And in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and plagues , and of evil spirits ; and unto many that were blind he gave sight .
Then Jesus answering said unto them , Go your way , and tell John what things ye have seen and heard ; how that the blind see , the lame walk , the lepers are cleansed , the deaf hear , the dead are raised , to the poor the gospel is preached .
And blessed is he , whosoever shall not be offended in me .
And when the messengers of John were departed , he began to speak unto the people concerning John , What went ye out into the wilderness for to see ? A reed shaken with the wind ?
But what went ye out for to see ? A man clothed in soft raiment ? Behold , they which are gorgeously apparelled , and live delicately , are in kings' courts .
But what went ye out for to see ? A prophet ? Yea , I say unto you , and much more than a prophet .
This is he , of whom it is written , Behold , I send my messenger before thy face , which shall prepare thy way before thee .
And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him . And he went into the Pharisee's house , and sat down to meat .
And , behold , a woman in the city , which was a sinner , when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee's house , brought an alabaster box of ointment ,
And when they had nothing to pay , he frankly forgave them both . Tell me therefore , which of them will love him most ?
And he turned to the woman , and said unto Simon , Seest thou this woman ? I entered into thine house , thou gavest me no water for my feet : but she hath washed my feet with tears , and wiped them with the hairs of her head .
Thou gavest me no kiss : but this woman since the time I came in hath not ceased to kiss my feet .
And he said unto her , Thy sins are forgiven .
And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves , Who is this that forgiveth sins also ?
And he said to the woman , Thy faith hath saved thee ; go in peace .
And it came to pass afterward , that he went throughout every city and village , preaching and shewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God : and the twelve were with him ,
And certain women , which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities , Mary called Magdalene , out of whom went seven devils ,
And when much people were gathered together , and were come to him out of every city , he spake by a parable :
And some fell upon a rock ; and as soon as it was sprung up , it withered away , because it lacked moisture .
And some fell among thorns ; and the thorns sprang up with it , and choked it .
And other fell on good ground , and sprang up , and bare fruit an hundredfold . And when he had said these things , he cried , He that hath ears to hear , let him hear .
And his disciples asked him , saying , What might this parable be ?
Now the parable is this : The seed is the word of God .
Those by the way side are they that hear ; then cometh the devil , and taketh away the word out of their hearts , lest they should believe and be saved .
They on the rock are they , which , when they hear , receive the word with joy ; and these have no root , which for a while believe , and in time of temptation fall away .
And that which fell among thorns are they , which , when they have heard , go forth , and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this life , and bring no fruit to perfection .
But that on the good ground are they , which in an honest and good heart , having heard the word , keep it , and bring forth fruit with patience .
No man , when he hath lighted a candle , covereth it with a vessel , or putteth it under a bed ; but setteth it on a candlestick , that they which enter in may see the light .
For nothing is secret , that shall not be made manifest ; neither any thing hid , that shall not be known and come abroad .
Take heed therefore how ye hear : for whosoever hath , to him shall be given ; and whosoever hath not , from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to have .
Then came to him his mother and his brethren , and could not come at him for the press .
And it was told him by certain which said , Thy mother and thy brethren stand without , desiring to see thee .
And he answered and said unto them , My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God , and do it .
Now it came to pass on a certain day , that he went into a ship with his disciples : and he said unto them , Let us go over unto the other side of the lake . And they launched forth .
But as they sailed he fell asleep : and there came down a storm of wind on the lake ; and they were filled with water , and were in jeopardy .
And they came to him , and awoke him , saying , Master , master , we perish . Then he arose , and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water : and they ceased , and there was a calm .
And he said unto them , Where is your faith ? And they being afraid wondered , saying one to another , What manner of man is this ! for he commandeth even the winds and water , and they obey him .
And they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes , which is over against Galilee .
And when he went forth to land , there met him out of the city a certain man , which had devils long time , and ware no clothes , neither abode in any house , but in the tombs .
And Jesus asked him , saying , What is thy name ? And he said , Legion : because many devils were entered into him .
And they besought him that he would not command them to go out into the deep .
And there was there an herd of many swine feeding on the mountain : and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them . And he suffered them .
Then went the devils out of the man , and entered into the swine : and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake , and were choked .
When they that fed them saw what was done , they fled , and went and told it in the city and in the country .
Then they went out to see what was done ; and came to Jesus , and found the man , out of whom the devils were departed , sitting at the feet of Jesus , clothed , and in his right mind : and they were afraid .
They also which saw it told them by what means he that was possessed of the devils was healed .
Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about besought him to depart from them ; for they were taken with great fear : and he went up into the ship , and returned back again .
Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him that he might be with him : but Jesus sent him away , saying ,
And it came to pass , that , when Jesus was returned , the people gladly received him : for they were all waiting for him .
And , behold , there came a man named Jairus , and he was a ruler of the synagogue : and he fell down at Jesus' feet , and besought him that he would come into his house :
And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years , which had spent all her living upon physicians , neither could be healed of any ,
Came behind him , and touched the border of his garment : and immediately her issue of blood stanched .
And Jesus said , Who touched me ? When all denied , Peter and they that were with him said , Master , the multitude throng thee and press thee , and sayest thou , Who touched me ?
And Jesus said , Somebody hath touched me : for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me .
And when the woman saw that she was not hid , she came trembling , and falling down before him , she declared unto him before all the people for what cause she had touched him and how she was healed immediately .
And he said unto her , Daughter , be of good comfort : thy faith hath made thee whole ; go in peace .
While he yet spake , there cometh one from the ruler of the synagogue's house , saying to him , Thy daughter is dead ; trouble not the Master .
But when Jesus heard it , he answered him , saying , Fear not : believe only , and she shall be made whole .
And when he came into the house , he suffered no man to go in , save Peter , and James , and John , and the father and the mother of the maiden .
And they laughed him to scorn , knowing that she was dead .
And he put them all out , and took her by the hand , and called , saying , Maid , arise .
And her spirit came again , and she arose straightway : and he commanded to give her meat .
And her parents were astonished : but he charged them that they should tell no man what was done .
Then he called his twelve disciples together , and gave them power and authority over all devils , and to cure diseases .
And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God , and to heal the sick .
And he said unto them , Take nothing for your journey , neither staves , nor scrip , neither bread , neither money ; neither have two coats apiece .
And whatsoever house ye enter into , there abide , and thence depart .
And whosoever will not receive you , when ye go out of that city , shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them .
And they departed , and went through the towns , preaching the gospel , and healing every where .
Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him : and he was perplexed , because that it was said of some , that John was risen from the dead ;
And Herod said , John have I beheaded : but who is this , of whom I hear such things ? And he desired to see him .
And the apostles , when they were returned , told him all that they had done . And he took them , and went aside privately into a desert place belonging to the city called Bethsaida .
And the people , when they knew it , followed him : and he received them , and spake unto them of the kingdom of God , and healed them that had need of healing .
And when the day began to wear away , then came the twelve , and said unto him , Send the multitude away , that they may go into the towns and country round about , and lodge , and get victuals : for we are here in a desert place .
But he said unto them , Give ye them to eat . And they said , We have no more but five loaves and two fishes ; except we should go and buy meat for all this people .
For they were about five thousand men . And he said to his disciples , Make them sit down by fifties in a company .
And they did so , and made them all sit down .
Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes , and looking up to heaven , he blessed them , and brake , and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude .
And they did eat , and were all filled : and there was taken up of fragments that remained to them twelve baskets .
And it came to pass , as he was alone praying , his disciples were with him : and he asked them , saying , Whom say the people that I am ?
They answering said , John the Baptist ; but some say , Elias ; and others say , that one of the old prophets is risen again .
He said unto them , But whom say ye that I am ? Peter answering said , The Christ of God .
And he straitly charged them , and commanded them to tell no man that thing ;
And he said to them all , If any man will come after me , let him deny himself , and take up his cross daily , and follow me .
But I tell you of a truth , there be some standing here , which shall not taste of death , till they see the kingdom of God .
And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings , he took Peter and John and James , and went up into a mountain to pray .
And as he prayed , the fashion of his countenance was altered , and his raiment was white and glistering .
And it came to pass , as they departed from him , Peter said unto Jesus , Master , it is good for us to be here : and let us make three tabernacles ; one for thee , and one for Moses , and one for Elias : not knowing what he said .
While he thus spake , there came a cloud , and overshadowed them : and they feared as they entered into the cloud .
And there came a voice out of the cloud , saying , This is my beloved Son : hear him .
And when the voice was past , Jesus was found alone . And they kept it close , and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen .
And it came to pass , that on the next day , when they were come down from the hill , much people met him .
And , behold , a man of the company cried out , saying , Master , I beseech thee , look upon my son : for he is mine only child .
And , lo , a spirit taketh him , and he suddenly crieth out ; and it teareth him that he foameth again , and bruising him hardly departeth from him .
And I besought thy disciples to cast him out ; and they could not .
And Jesus answering said , O faithless and perverse generation , how long shall I be with you , and suffer you ? Bring thy son hither .
And as he was yet a coming , the devil threw him down , and tare him . And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit , and healed the child , and delivered him again to his father .
But they understood not this saying , and it was hid from them , that they perceived it not : and they feared to ask him of that saying .
Then there arose a reasoning among them , which of them should be greatest .
And Jesus , perceiving the thought of their heart , took a child , and set him by him ,
And John answered and said , Master , we saw one casting out devils in thy name ; and we forbad him , because he followeth not with us .
And Jesus said unto him , Forbid him not : for he that is not against us is for us .
And when his disciples James and John saw this , they said , Lord , wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven , and consume them , even as Elias did ?
But he turned , and rebuked them , and said , Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of .
And it came to pass , that , as they went in the way , a certain man said unto him , Lord , I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest .
And Jesus said unto him , Foxes have holes , and birds of the air have nests ; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head .
And he said unto another , Follow me . But he said , Lord , suffer me first to go and bury my father .
Jesus said unto him , Let the dead bury their dead : but go thou and preach the kingdom of God .
And another also said , Lord , I will follow thee ; but let me first go bid them farewell , which are at home at my house .
And Jesus said unto him , No man , having put his hand to the plough , and looking back , is fit for the kingdom of God .
Therefore said he unto them , The harvest truly is great , but the labourers are few : pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest , that he would send forth labourers into his harvest .
Go your ways : behold , I send you forth as lambs among wolves .
Carry neither purse , nor scrip , nor shoes : and salute no man by the way .
And into whatsoever house ye enter , first say , Peace be to this house .
And if the son of peace be there , your peace shall rest upon it : if not , it shall turn to you again .
And in the same house remain , eating and drinking such things as they give : for the labourer is worthy of his hire . Go not from house to house .
And into whatsoever city ye enter , and they receive you , eat such things as are set before you :
And heal the sick that are therein , and say unto them , The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you .
But into whatsoever city ye enter , and they receive you not , go your ways out into the streets of the same , and say ,
But I say unto you , that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom , than for that city .
Woe unto thee , Chorazin ! woe unto thee , Bethsaida ! for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon , which have been done in you , they had a great while ago repented , sitting in sackcloth and ashes .
But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment , than for you .
And thou , Capernaum , which art exalted to heaven , shalt be thrust down to hell .
He that heareth you heareth me ; and he that despiseth you despiseth me ; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me .
And he said unto them , I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven .
Behold , I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions , and over all the power of the enemy : and nothing shall by any means hurt you .
Notwithstanding in this rejoice not , that the spirits are subject unto you ; but rather rejoice , because your names are written in heaven .
In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit , and said , I thank thee , O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent , and hast revealed them unto babes : even so , Father ; for so it seemed good in thy sight .
All things are delivered to me of my Father : and no man knoweth who the Son is , but the Father ; and who the Father is , but the Son , and he to whom the Son will reveal him .
And he turned him unto his disciples , and said privately , Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see :
And , behold , a certain lawyer stood up , and tempted him , saying , Master , what shall I do to inherit eternal life ?
He said unto him , What is written in the law ? how readest thou ?
And he answering said , Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart , and with all thy soul , and with all thy strength , and with all thy mind ; and thy neighbour as thyself .
And he said unto him , Thou hast answered right : this do , and thou shalt live .
Now it came to pass , as they went , that he entered into a certain village : and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house .
But one thing is needful : and Mary hath chosen that good part , which shall not be taken away from her .
And it came to pass , that , as he was praying in a certain place , when he ceased , one of his disciples said unto him , Lord , teach us to pray , as John also taught his disciples .
And he said unto them , When ye pray , say , Our Father which art in heaven , Hallowed be thy name . Thy kingdom come . Thy will be done , as in heaven , so in earth .
I say unto you , Though he will not rise and give him , because he is his friend , yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he needeth .
And I say unto you , Ask , and it shall be given you ; seek , and ye shall find ; knock , and it shall be opened unto you .
If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father , will he give him a stone ? or if he ask a fish , will he for a fish give him a serpent ?
Or if he shall ask an egg , will he offer him a scorpion ?
If ye then , being evil , know how to give good gifts unto your children : how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him ?
And he was casting out a devil , and it was dumb . And it came to pass , when the devil was gone out , the dumb spake ; and the people wondered .
But some of them said , He casteth out devils through Beelzebub the chief of the devils .
And others , tempting him , sought of him a sign from heaven .
But he , knowing their thoughts , said unto them , Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation ; and a house divided against a house falleth .
If Satan also be divided against himself , how shall his kingdom stand ? because ye say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub .
And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils , by whom do your sons cast them out ? therefore shall they be your judges .
But if I with the finger of God cast out devils , no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you .
When a strong man armed keepeth his palace , his goods are in peace :
But when a stronger than he shall come upon him , and overcome him , he taketh from him all his armour wherein he trusted , and divideth his spoils .
He that is not with me is against me : and he that gathereth not with me scattereth .
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man , he walketh through dry places , seeking rest ; and finding none , he saith , I will return unto my house whence I came out .
And when he cometh , he findeth it swept and garnished .
Then goeth he , and taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked than himself ; and they enter in , and dwell there : and the last state of that man is worse than the first .
And it came to pass , as he spake these things , a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice , and said unto him , Blessed is the womb that bare thee , and the paps which thou hast sucked .
But he said , Yea rather , blessed are they that hear the word of God , and keep it .
And when the people were gathered thick together , he began to say , This is an evil generation : they seek a sign ; and there shall no sign be given it , but the sign of Jonas the prophet .
For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites , so shall also the Son of man be to this generation .
The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation , and condemn them : for she came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon ; and , behold , a greater than Solomon is here .
The men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this generation , and shall condemn it : for they repented at the preaching of Jonas ; and , behold , a greater than Jonas is here .
No man , when he hath lighted a candle , putteth it in a secret place , neither under a bushel , but on a candlestick , that they which come in may see the light .
The light of the body is the eye : therefore when thine eye is single , thy whole body also is full of light ; but when thine eye is evil , thy body also is full of darkness .
Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not darkness .
If thy whole body therefore be full of light , having no part dark , the whole shall be full of light , as when the bright shining of a candle doth give thee light .
And as he spake , a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him : and he went in , and sat down to meat .
And when the Pharisee saw it , he marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner .
And the Lord said unto him , Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter ; but your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness .
Ye fools , did not he that made that which is without make that which is within also ?
But rather give alms of such things as ye have ; and , behold , all things are clean unto you .
But woe unto you , Pharisees ! for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs , and pass over judgment and the love of God : these ought ye to have done , and not to leave the other undone .
Woe unto you , Pharisees ! for ye love the uppermost seats in the synagogues , and greetings in the markets .
Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! for ye are as graves which appear not , and the men that walk over them are not aware of them .
Then answered one of the lawyers , and said unto him , Master , thus saying thou reproachest us also .
And he said , Woe unto you also , ye lawyers ! for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be borne , and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers .
Woe unto you ! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets , and your fathers killed them .
Therefore also said the wisdom of God , I will send them prophets and apostles , and some of them they shall slay and persecute :
Woe unto you , lawyers ! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge : ye entered not in yourselves , and them that were entering in ye hindered .
And as he said these things unto them , the scribes and the Pharisees began to urge him vehemently , and to provoke him to speak of many things :
In the mean time , when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude of people , insomuch that they trode one upon another , he began to say unto his disciples first of all , Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees , which is hypocrisy .
For there is nothing covered , that shall not be revealed ; neither hid , that shall not be known .
Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light ; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the housetops .
And I say unto you my friends , Be not afraid of them that kill the body , and after that have no more that they can do .
But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear : Fear him , which after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell ; yea , I say unto you , Fear him .
Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings , and not one of them is forgotten before God ?
But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered . Fear not therefore : ye are of more value than many sparrows .
Also I say unto you , Whosoever shall confess me before men , him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God :
But he that denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of God .
And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man , it shall be forgiven him : but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven .
And when they bring you unto the synagogues , and unto magistrates , and powers , take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer , or what ye shall say :
And he said unto them , Take heed , and beware of covetousness : for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth .
And I will say to my soul , Soul , thou hast much goods laid up for many years ; take thine ease , eat , drink , and be merry .
But God said unto him , Thou fool , this night thy soul shall be required of thee : then whose shall those things be , which thou hast provided ?
And he said unto his disciples , Therefore I say unto you , Take no thought for your life , what ye shall eat ; neither for the body , what ye shall put on .
The life is more than meat , and the body is more than raiment .
Consider the ravens : for they neither sow nor reap ; which neither have storehouse nor barn ; and God feedeth them : how much more are ye better than the fowls ?
And which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one cubit ?
If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least , why take ye thought for the rest ?
Consider the lilies how they grow : they toil not , they spin not ; and yet I say unto you , that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these .
If then God so clothe the grass , which is to day in the field , and to morrow is cast into the oven ; how much more will he clothe you , O ye of little faith ?
And seek not ye what ye shall eat , or what ye shall drink , neither be ye of doubtful mind .
For all these things do the nations of the world seek after : and your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things .
But rather seek ye the kingdom of God ; and all these things shall be added unto you .
Fear not , little flock ; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom .
Sell that ye have , and give alms ; provide yourselves bags which wax not old , a treasure in the heavens that faileth not , where no thief approacheth , neither moth corrupteth .
Blessed are those servants , whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching : verily I say unto you , that he shall gird himself , and make them to sit down to meat , and will come forth and serve them .
And if he shall come in the second watch , or come in the third watch , and find them so , blessed are those servants .
And this know , that if the goodman of the house had known what hour the thief would come , he would have watched , and not have suffered his house to be broken through .
Be ye therefore ready also : for the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye think not .
Then Peter said unto him , Lord , speakest thou this parable unto us , or even to all ?
And the Lord said , Who then is that faithful and wise steward , whom his lord shall make ruler over his household , to give them their portion of meat in due season ?
Blessed is that servant , whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing .
Of a truth I say unto you , that he will make him ruler over all that he hath .
But and if that servant say in his heart , My lord delayeth his coming ; and shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens , and to eat and drink , and to be drunken ;
And that servant , which knew his lord's will , and prepared not himself , neither did according to his will , shall be beaten with many stripes .
But he that knew not , and did commit things worthy of stripes , shall be beaten with few stripes . For unto whomsoever much is given , of him shall be much required : and to whom men have committed much , of him they will ask the more .
I am come to send fire on the earth ; and what will I if it be already kindled ?
But I have a baptism to be baptized with ; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished !
And he said also to the people , When ye see a cloud rise out of the west , straightway ye say , There cometh a shower ; and so it is .
And when ye see the south wind blow , ye say , There will be heat ; and it cometh to pass .
Ye hypocrites , ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth ; but how is it that ye do not discern this time ?
When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate , as thou art in the way , give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him ; lest he hale thee to the judge , and the judge deliver thee to the officer , and the officer cast thee into prison .
And Jesus answering said unto them , Suppose ye that these Galilaeans were sinners above all the Galilaeans , because they suffered such things ?
He spake also this parable ; A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard ; and he came and sought fruit thereon , and found none .
And he answering said unto him , Lord , let it alone this year also , till I shall dig about it , and dung it :
And the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation , because that Jesus had healed on the sabbath day , and said unto the people , There are six days in which men ought to work : in them therefore come and be healed , and not on the sabbath day .
The Lord then answered him , and said , Thou hypocrite , doth not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall , and lead him away to watering ?
And ought not this woman , being a daughter of Abraham , whom Satan hath bound , lo , these eighteen years , be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day ?
Then said he , Unto what is the kingdom of God like ? and whereunto shall I resemble it ?
It is like a grain of mustard seed , which a man took , and cast into his garden ; and it grew , and waxed a great tree ; and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of it .
And again he said , Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God ?
It is like leaven , which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal , till the whole was leavened .
And it came to pass , as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath day , that they watched him .
And he put forth a parable to those which were bidden , when he marked how they chose out the chief rooms ; saying unto them ,
Then said he also to him that bade him , When thou makest a dinner or a supper , call not thy friends , nor thy brethren , neither thy kinsmen , nor thy rich neighbours ; lest they also bid thee again , and a recompence be made thee .
But when thou makest a feast , call the poor , the maimed , the lame , the blind :
And thou shalt be blessed ; for they cannot recompense thee : for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just .
And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things , he said unto him , Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God .
Then said he unto him , A certain man made a great supper , and bade many :
And sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden , Come ; for all things are now ready .
And they all with one consent began to make excuse . The first said unto him , I have bought a piece of ground , and I must needs go and see it : I pray thee have me excused .
And another said , I have bought five yoke of oxen , and I go to prove them : I pray thee have me excused .
And another said , I have married a wife , and therefore I cannot come .
So that servant came , and shewed his lord these things . Then the master of the house being angry said to his servant , Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city , and bring in hither the poor , and the maimed , and the halt , and the blind .
And the servant said , Lord , it is done as thou hast commanded , and yet there is room .
And the lord said unto the servant , Go out into the highways and hedges , and compel them to come in , that my house may be filled .
Salt is good : but if the salt have lost his savour , wherewith shall it be seasoned ?
Then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear him .
And the Pharisees and scribes murmured , saying , This man receiveth sinners , and eateth with them .
And when he hath found it , he layeth it on his shoulders , rejoicing .
I say unto you , that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth , more than over ninety and nine just persons , which need no repentance .
And the younger of them said to his father , Father , give me the portion of goods that falleth to me . And he divided unto them his living .
And not many days after the younger son gathered all together , and took his journey into a far country , and there wasted his substance with riotous living .
And when he came to himself , he said , How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare , and I perish with hunger !
I will arise and go to my father , and will say unto him , Father , I have sinned against heaven , and before thee ,
And he arose , and came to his father . But when he was yet a great way off , his father saw him , and had compassion , and ran , and fell on his neck , and kissed him .
And the lord commended the unjust steward , because he had done wisely : for the children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light .
And I say unto you , Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness ; that , when ye fail , they may receive you into everlasting habitations .
He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much : and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much .
No servant can serve two masters : for either he will hate the one , and love the other ; or else he will hold to the one , and despise the other . Ye cannot serve God and mammon .
And the Pharisees also , who were covetous , heard all these things : and they derided him .
And he said unto them , Ye are they which justify yourselves before men ; but God knoweth your hearts : for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God .
The law and the prophets were until John : since that time the kingdom of God is preached , and every man presseth into it .
And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass , than one tittle of the law to fail .
Whosoever putteth away his wife , and marrieth another , committeth adultery : and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery .
And he cried and said , Father Abraham , have mercy on me , and send Lazarus , that he may dip the tip of his finger in water , and cool my tongue ; for I am tormented in this flame .
Then said he unto the disciples , It is impossible but that offences will come : but woe unto him , through whom they come !
It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck , and he cast into the sea , than that he should offend one of these little ones .
Take heed to yourselves : If thy brother trespass against thee , rebuke him ; and if he repent , forgive him .
And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day , and seven times in a day turn again to thee , saying , I repent ; thou shalt forgive him .
And the Lord said , If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed , ye might say unto this sycamine tree , Be thou plucked up by the root , and be thou planted in the sea ; and it should obey you .
So likewise ye , when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you , say , We are unprofitable servants : we have done that which was our duty to do .
And it came to pass , as he went to Jerusalem , that he passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee .
And as he entered into a certain village , there met him ten men that were lepers , which stood afar off :
And when he saw them , he said unto them , Go shew yourselves unto the priests . And it came to pass , that , as they went , they were cleansed .
And he said unto him , Arise , go thy way : thy faith hath made thee whole .
And when he was demanded of the Pharisees , when the kingdom of God should come , he answered them and said , The kingdom of God cometh not with observation :
And he said unto the disciples , The days will come , when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man , and ye shall not see it .
And they shall say to you , See here ; or , see there : go not after them , nor follow them .
But first must he suffer many things , and be rejected of this generation .
And as it was in the days of Noe , so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man .
They did eat , they drank , they married wives , they were given in marriage , until the day that Noe entered into the ark , and the flood came , and destroyed them all .
Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot ; they did eat , they drank , they bought , they sold , they planted , they builded ;
But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven , and destroyed them all .
Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed .
In that day , he which shall be upon the housetop , and his stuff in the house , let him not come down to take it away : and he that is in the field , let him likewise not return back .
Remember Lot's wife .
And he spake a parable unto them to this end , that men ought always to pray , and not to faint ;
And shall not God avenge his own elect , which cry day and night unto him , though he bear long with them ?
And he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they were righteous , and despised others :
The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself , God , I thank thee , that I am not as other men are , extortioners , unjust , adulterers , or even as this publican .
I fast twice in the week , I give tithes of all that I possess .
And the publican , standing afar off , would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven , but smote upon his breast , saying , God be merciful to me a sinner .
I tell you , this man went down to his house justified rather than the other : for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased ; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted .
And they brought unto him also infants , that he would touch them : but when his disciples saw it , they rebuked them .
But Jesus called them unto him , and said , Suffer little children to come unto me , and forbid them not : for of such is the kingdom of God .
Verily I say unto you , Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein .
And a certain ruler asked him , saying , Good Master , what shall I do to inherit eternal life ?
And Jesus said unto him , Why callest thou me good ? none is good , save one , that is , God .
Thou knowest the commandments , Do not commit adultery , Do not kill , Do not steal , Do not bear false witness , Honour thy father and thy mother .
And he said , All these have I kept from my youth up .
Now when Jesus heard these things , he said unto him , Yet lackest thou one thing : sell all that thou hast , and distribute unto the poor , and thou shalt have treasure in heaven : and come , follow me .
And when he heard this , he was very sorrowful : for he was very rich .
And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful , he said , How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God !
And they that heard it said , Who then can be saved ?
And he said , The things which are impossible with men are possible with God .
Then Peter said , Lo , we have left all , and followed thee .
And he said unto them , Verily I say unto you , There is no man that hath left house , or parents , or brethren , or wife , or children , for the kingdom of God's sake ,
Then he took unto him the twelve , and said unto them , Behold , we go up to Jerusalem , and all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man shall be accomplished .
And they understood none of these things : and this saying was hid from them , neither knew they the things which were spoken .
And it came to pass , that as he was come nigh unto Jericho , a certain blind man sat by the way side begging :
And hearing the multitude pass by , he asked what it meant .
And they told him , that Jesus of Nazareth passeth by .
And he cried , saying , Jesus , thou Son of David , have mercy on me .
And they which went before rebuked him , that he should hold his peace : but he cried so much the more , Thou Son of David , have mercy on me .
And Jesus stood , and commanded him to be brought unto him : and when he was come near , he asked him ,
And Jesus said unto him , Receive thy sight : thy faith hath saved thee .
And immediately he received his sight , and followed him , glorifying God : and all the people , when they saw it , gave praise unto God .
And when they saw it , they all murmured , saying , That he was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner .
And Zacchaeus stood , and said unto the Lord ; Behold , Lord , the half of my goods I give to the poor ; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation , I restore him fourfold .
But his citizens hated him , and sent a message after him , saying , We will not have this man to reign over us .
And it came to pass , that when he was returned , having received the kingdom , then he commanded these servants to be called unto him , to whom he had given the money , that he might know how much every man had gained by trading .
Then came the first , saying , Lord , thy pound hath gained ten pounds .
And he said unto him , Well , thou good servant : because thou hast been faithful in a very little , have thou authority over ten cities .
And the second came , saying , Lord , thy pound hath gained five pounds .
And he said likewise to him , Be thou also over five cities .
And another came , saying , Lord , behold , here is thy pound , which I have kept laid up in a napkin :
And he saith unto him , Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee , thou wicked servant . Thou knewest that I was an austere man , taking up that I laid not down , and reaping that I did not sow :
Wherefore then gavest not thou my money into the bank , that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury ?
And he said unto them that stood by , Take from him the pound , and give it to him that hath ten pounds .
For I say unto you , That unto every one which hath shall be given ; and from him that hath not , even that he hath shall be taken away from him .
But those mine enemies , which would not that I should reign over them , bring hither , and slay them before me .
And when he had thus spoken , he went before , ascending up to Jerusalem .
And it came to pass , when he was come nigh to Bethphage and Bethany , at the mount called the mount of Olives , he sent two of his disciples ,
And if any man ask you , Why do ye loose him ? thus shall ye say unto him , Because the Lord hath need of him .
And they that were sent went their way , and found even as he had said unto them .
And they brought him to Jesus : and they cast their garments upon the colt , and they set Jesus thereon .
And as he went , they spread their clothes in the way .
And when he was come nigh , even now at the descent of the mount of Olives , the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works that they had seen ;
Saying , Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord : peace in heaven , and glory in the highest .
And some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said unto him , Master , rebuke thy disciples .
And he answered and said unto them , I tell you that , if these should hold their peace , the stones would immediately cry out .
And when he was come near , he beheld the city , and wept over it ,
Saying , If thou hadst known , even thou , at least in this thy day , the things which belong unto thy peace ! but now they are hid from thine eyes .
And he taught daily in the temple . But the chief priests and the scribes and the chief of the people sought to destroy him ,
And it came to pass , that on one of those days , as he taught the people in the temple , and preached the gospel , the chief priests and the scribes came upon him with the elders ,
And spake unto him , saying , Tell us , by what authority doest thou these things ? or who is he that gave thee this authority ?
And he answered and said unto them , I will also ask you one thing ; and answer me :
And they reasoned with themselves , saying , If we shall say , From heaven ; he will say , Why then believed ye him not ?
But and if we say , Of men ; all the people will stone us : for they be persuaded that John was a prophet .
And they answered , that they could not tell whence it was .
And Jesus said unto them , Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things .
Then began he to speak to the people this parable ; A certain man planted a vineyard , and let it forth to husbandmen , and went into a far country for a long time .
And at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen , that they should give him of the fruit of the vineyard : but the husbandmen beat him , and sent him away empty .
And again he sent another servant : and they beat him also , and entreated him shamefully , and sent him away empty .
And again he sent a third : and they wounded him also , and cast him out .
Then said the lord of the vineyard , What shall I do ? I will send my beloved son : it may be they will reverence him when they see him .
But when the husbandmen saw him , they reasoned among themselves , saying , This is the heir : come , let us kill him , that the inheritance may be ours .
So they cast him out of the vineyard , and killed him . What therefore shall the lord of the vineyard do unto them ?
He shall come and destroy these husbandmen , and shall give the vineyard to others . And when they heard it , they said , God forbid .
And he beheld them , and said , What is this then that is written , The stone which the builders rejected , the same is become the head of the corner ?
And they watched him , and sent forth spies , which should feign themselves just men , that they might take hold of his words , that so they might deliver him unto the power and authority of the governor .
And they asked him , saying , Master , we know that thou sayest and teachest rightly , neither acceptest thou the person of any , but teachest the way of God truly :
But he perceived their craftiness , and said unto them , Why tempt ye me ?
And he said unto them , Render therefore unto Caesar the things which be Caesar's , and unto God the things which be God's .
And they could not take hold of his words before the people : and they marvelled at his answer , and held their peace .
Then came to him certain of the Sadducees , which deny that there is any resurrection ; and they asked him ,
There were therefore seven brethren : and the first took a wife , and died without children .
Last of all the woman died also .
Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them is she ? for seven had her to wife .
And Jesus answering said unto them , The children of this world marry , and are given in marriage :
But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world , and the resurrection from the dead , neither marry , nor are given in marriage :
Now that the dead are raised , even Moses shewed at the bush , when he calleth the Lord the God of Abraham , and the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob .
For he is not a God of the dead , but of the living : for all live unto him .
And he said unto them , How say they that Christ is David's son ?
Then in the audience of all the people he said unto his disciples ,
Which devour widows' houses , and for a shew make long prayers : the same shall receive greater damnation .
And he looked up , and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury .
And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither two mites .
And as some spake of the temple , how it was adorned with goodly stones and gifts , he said ,
And they asked him , saying , Master , but when shall these things be ? and what sign will there be when these things shall come to pass ?
And he said , Take heed that ye be not deceived : for many shall come in my name , saying , I am Christ ; and the time draweth near : go ye not therefore after them .
But when ye shall hear of wars and commotions , be not terrified : for these things must first come to pass ; but the end is not by and by .
Then said he unto them , Nation shall rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom :
And great earthquakes shall be in divers places , and famines , and pestilences ; and fearful sights and great signs shall there be from heaven .
But before all these , they shall lay their hands on you , and persecute you , delivering you up to the synagogues , and into prisons , being brought before kings and rulers for my name's sake .
Settle it therefore in your hearts , not to meditate before what ye shall answer :
And ye shall be betrayed both by parents , and brethren , and kinsfolks , and friends ; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death .
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake .
But there shall not an hair of your head perish .
In your patience possess ye your souls .
And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies , then know that the desolation thereof is nigh .
But woe unto them that are with child , and to them that give suck , in those days ! for there shall be great distress in the land , and wrath upon this people .
And they shall fall by the edge of the sword , and shall be led away captive into all nations : and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles , until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled .
And there shall be signs in the sun , and in the moon , and in the stars ; and upon the earth distress of nations , with perplexity ; the sea and the waves roaring ;
Men's hearts failing them for fear , and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth : for the powers of heaven shall be shaken .
And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory .
And when these things begin to come to pass , then look up , and lift up your heads ; for your redemption draweth nigh .
And he spake to them a parable ; Behold the fig tree , and all the trees ;
So likewise ye , when ye see these things come to pass , know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand .
Verily I say unto you , This generation shall not pass away , till all be fulfilled .
Heaven and earth shall pass away : but my words shall not pass away .
Watch ye therefore , and pray always , that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass , and to stand before the Son of man .
And in the day time he was teaching in the temple ; and at night he went out , and abode in the mount that is called the mount of Olives .
Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh , which is called the Passover .
And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill him ; for they feared the people .
Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot , being of the number of the twelve .
And he went his way , and communed with the chief priests and captains , how he might betray him unto them .
And they were glad , and covenanted to give him money .
Then came the day of unleavened bread , when the passover must be killed .
And he sent Peter and John , saying , Go and prepare us the passover , that we may eat .
And they said unto him , Where wilt thou that we prepare ?
And he said unto them , Behold , when ye are entered into the city , there shall a man meet you , bearing a pitcher of water ; follow him into the house where he entereth in .
And he shall shew you a large upper room furnished : there make ready .
And they went , and found as he had said unto them : and they made ready the passover .
And when the hour was come , he sat down , and the twelve apostles with him .
And he took the cup , and gave thanks , and said , Take this , and divide it among yourselves :
And he took bread , and gave thanks , and brake it , and gave unto them , saying , This is my body which is given for you : this do in remembrance of me .
But , behold , the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table .
And they began to inquire among themselves , which of them it was that should do this thing .
And there was also a strife among them , which of them should be accounted the greatest .
And he said unto them , The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them ; and they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors .
But ye shall not be so : but he that is greatest among you , let him be as the younger ; and he that is chief , as he that doth serve .
For whether is greater , he that sitteth at meat , or he that serveth ? is not he that sitteth at meat ? but I am among you as he that serveth .
And the Lord said , Simon , Simon , behold , Satan hath desired to have you , that he may sift you as wheat :
But I have prayed for thee , that thy faith fail not : and when thou art converted , strengthen thy brethren .
And he said unto him , Lord , I am ready to go with thee , both into prison , and to death .
And he said , I tell thee , Peter , the cock shall not crow this day , before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me .
And he said unto them , When I sent you without purse , and scrip , and shoes , lacked ye any thing ? And they said , Nothing .
Then said he unto them , But now , he that hath a purse , let him take it , and likewise his scrip : and he that hath no sword , let him sell his garment , and buy one .
For I say unto you , that this that is written must yet be accomplished in me , And he was reckoned among the transgressors : for the things concerning me have an end .
And he came out , and went , as he was wont , to the mount of Olives ; and his disciples also followed him .
And when he was at the place , he said unto them , Pray that ye enter not into temptation .
And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast , and kneeled down , and prayed ,
And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven , strengthening him .
And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly : and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground .
And when he rose up from prayer , and was come to his disciples , he found them sleeping for sorrow ,
And said unto them , Why sleep ye ? rise and pray , lest ye enter into temptation .
And while he yet spake , behold a multitude , and he that was called Judas , one of the twelve , went before them , and drew near unto Jesus to kiss him .
When they which were about him saw what would follow , they said unto him , Lord , shall we smite with the sword ?
And one of them smote the servant of the high priest , and cut off his right ear .
And Jesus answered and said , Suffer ye thus far . And he touched his ear , and healed him .
Then Jesus said unto the chief priests , and captains of the temple , and the elders , which were come to him , Be ye come out , as against a thief , with swords and staves ?
When I was daily with you in the temple , ye stretched forth no hands against me : but this is your hour , and the power of darkness .
Then took they him , and led him , and brought him into the high priest's house . And Peter followed afar off .
And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall , and were set down together , Peter sat down among them .
But a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire , and earnestly looked upon him , and said , This man was also with him .
And he denied him , saying , Woman , I know him not .
And after a little while another saw him , and said , Thou art also of them . And Peter said , Man , I am not .
And about the space of one hour after another confidently affirmed , saying , Of a truth this fellow also was with him : for he is a Galilaean .
And Peter said , Man , I know not what thou sayest . And immediately , while he yet spake , the cock crew .
And the Lord turned , and looked upon Peter . And Peter remembered the word of the Lord , how he had said unto him , Before the cock crow , thou shalt deny me thrice .
And the men that held Jesus mocked him , and smote him .
And when they had blindfolded him , they struck him on the face , and asked him , saying , Prophesy , who is it that smote thee ?
And many other things blasphemously spake they against him .
And as soon as it was day , the elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes came together , and led him into their council , saying ,
And if I also ask you , ye will not answer me , nor let me go .
Then said they all , Art thou then the Son of God ? And he said unto them , Ye say that I am .
And they said , What need we any further witness ? for we ourselves have heard of his own mouth .
And the whole multitude of them arose , and led him unto Pilate .
And Pilate asked him , saying , Art thou the King of the Jews ? And he answered him and said , Thou sayest it .
Then said Pilate to the chief priests and to the people , I find no fault in this man .
And they were the more fierce , saying , He stirreth up the people , teaching throughout all Jewry , beginning from Galilee to this place .
When Pilate heard of Galilee , he asked whether the man were a Galilaean .
And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction , he sent him to Herod , who himself also was at Jerusalem at that time .
And when Herod saw Jesus , he was exceeding glad : for he was desirous to see him of a long season , because he had heard many things of him ; and he hoped to have seen some miracle done by him .
And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together : for before they were at enmity between themselves .
And as they led him away , they laid hold upon one Simon , a Cyrenian , coming out of the country , and on him they laid the cross , that he might bear it after Jesus .
And there followed him a great company of people , and of women , which also bewailed and lamented him .
But Jesus turning unto them said , Daughters of Jerusalem , weep not for me , but weep for yourselves , and for your children .
Then shall they begin to say to the mountains , Fall on us ; and to the hills , Cover us .
For if they do these things in a green tree , what shall be done in the dry ?
And there were also two other , malefactors , led with him to be put to death .
And when they were come to the place , which is called Calvary , there they crucified him , and the malefactors , one on the right hand , and the other on the left .
Then said Jesus , Father , forgive them ; for they know not what they do . And they parted his raiment , and cast lots .
And the people stood beholding . And the rulers also with them derided him , saying , He saved others ; let him save himself , if he be Christ , the chosen of God .
And the soldiers also mocked him , coming to him , and offering him vinegar ,
And a superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek , and Latin , and Hebrew , THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS .
And Jesus said unto him , Verily I say unto thee , To day shalt thou be with me in paradise .
And it was about the sixth hour , and there was a darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour .
Now when the centurion saw what was done , he glorified God , saying , Certainly this was a righteous man .
And all the people that came together to that sight , beholding the things which were done , smote their breasts , and returned .
And he took it down , and wrapped it in linen , and laid it in a sepulchre that was hewn in stone , wherein never man before was laid .
And that day was the preparation , and the sabbath drew on .
And the women also , which came with him from Galilee , followed after , and beheld the sepulchre , and how his body was laid .
And they returned , and prepared spices and ointments ; and rested the sabbath day according to the commandment .
Now upon the first day of the week , very early in the morning , they came unto the sepulchre , bringing the spices which they had prepared , and certain others with them .
And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre .
And they entered in , and found not the body of the Lord Jesus .
And it came to pass , as they were much perplexed thereabout , behold , two men stood by them in shining garments :
And as they were afraid , and bowed down their faces to the earth , they said unto them , Why seek ye the living among the dead ?
He is not here , but is risen : remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee ,
And they remembered his words ,
And , behold , two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus , which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs .
And they talked together of all these things which had happened .
And it came to pass , that , while they communed together and reasoned , Jesus himself drew near , and went with them .
But their eyes were holden that they should not know him .
And he said unto them , What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another , as ye walk , and are sad ?
And the one of them , whose name was Cleopas , answering said unto him , Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem , and hast not known the things which are come to pass therein these days ?
And he said unto them , What things ? And they said unto him , Concerning Jesus of Nazareth , which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people :
And how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death , and have crucified him .
Then he said unto them , O fools , and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken :
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things , and to enter into his glory ?
And beginning at Moses and all the prophets , he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself .
And they drew nigh unto the village , whither they went : and he made as though he would have gone further .
And it came to pass , as he sat at meat with them , he took bread , and blessed it , and brake , and gave to them .
And their eyes were opened , and they knew him ; and he vanished out of their sight .
And they said one to another , Did not our heart burn within us , while he talked with us by the way , and while he opened to us the scriptures ?
And they rose up the same hour , and returned to Jerusalem , and found the eleven gathered together , and them that were with them ,
Saying , The Lord is risen indeed , and hath appeared to Simon .
And they told what things were done in the way , and how he was known of them in breaking of bread .
And as they thus spake , Jesus himself stood in the midst of them , and saith unto them , Peace be unto you .
But they were terrified and affrighted , and supposed that they had seen a spirit .
And he said unto them , Why are ye troubled ? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts ?
Behold my hands and my feet , that it is I myself : handle me , and see ; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones , as ye see me have .
And when he had thus spoken , he shewed them his hands and his feet .
And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish , and of an honeycomb .
And he said unto them , These are the words which I spake unto you , while I was yet with you , that all things must be fulfilled , which were written in the law of Moses , and in the prophets , and in the psalms , concerning me .
Then opened he their understanding , that they might understand the scriptures ,
And said unto them , Thus it is written , and thus it behoved Christ to suffer , and to rise from the dead the third day :
And ye are witnesses of these things .
And , behold , I send the promise of my Father upon you : but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem , until ye be endued with power from on high .
And he led them out as far as to Bethany , and he lifted up his hands , and blessed them .
